content/modules/ROOT/pages/module-02.adoc, before:

= Section 3 - Splunk

== Part 2: AIOps with Network Automation

[quote]
Welcome to Part 2! In Part 1, you learned how Red Hat AI and Ansible Lightspeed work together to create self-healing infrastructure for Apache services. Now you'll apply those same AIOps concepts to **network infrastructure**, using Splunk for observability, Event-Driven Ansible for automation triggers, and Ansible Lightspeed to generate network remediation playbooks automatically.

In this lab environment, we've included Splunk to integrate with Event Driven Ansible (EDA). Splunk collects and indexes log files and other data from network sources in real-time. This indexed data is then stored in a way that allows for incredibly fast and flexible searching and analysis. From a Splunk search for OSPF related events, we can create a Splunk alert to send webhooks to EDA. 

Think of Splunk as an observability tool. 

[quote]
Observability tools, such as Splunk, Prometheus, Grafana, Dynatrace, and others, provide deep insights into the health and performance of IT systems. They excel at collecting metrics, logs, and traces to identify when something is wrong. However, they traditionally rely on human intervention to interpret the alerts and take corrective action. This is where Ansible EDA steps in, creating a powerful synergy.

== Splunk Setup and Router Configuration

=== Red Hat + Splunk
The integration between Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform and Splunk creates a powerful, two-way bridge that transforms IT operations by connecting Splunk's deep data analysis and observability with Ansible's robust automation capabilities. This is achieved through an add-on that allows for a seamless flow of information. 

image::redhat_splunk.png[Red Hat + Splunk, 100%]

=== Accessing Splunk
[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Component
| Value

| Splunk URL
| link:{splunk_url}[Splunk,window=_blank]

| Username
| `{splunk_username}`

| Password
| `{splunk_password}`
|===

	1.	Open Splunk using the above details ( use incognito window if needed )
	2.	Login using the credentials provided

=== Data Inputs
In Splunk, "data inputs" are the various methods and sources from which the platform can ingest data for indexing, searching, and analysis. They are the pathways that feed raw machine data into the Splunk system.
  	
Once logged into Splunk, click on the settings at the top of the screen and data inputs

image::data_inputs.png[Data Inputs, 250%]

==== TCP Port 5514
Splunk has been pre-loaded to open TCP port 5514. We simply need to add a data input to receive Cisco IOS syslogs using this port.

Step 1:  Add a new TCP input


image::tcp_1.png[Add TCP, 200%]

Step 2: Click on "New Local TCP"

image::tcp2.png[Add TCP, 200%]

Step 3: Select TCP, port 5514, and click "next" 

image::tcp_3.png[Add TCP, 200%]

Step 4: Configure the following input settings

=== Input Settings
[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Component
| Value

| Source Type
| cisco:ios

| App Context
| Cisco Networks (cisco:ios)

| Host 
| IP
|===

image::tcp_4.png[Add TCP, 100%]

Step 5: Validate your configuration and submit

image::tcp_5.png[Add TCP, 150%]

=== Cisco Routers 

This lab includes two Cisco Cat8000v routers. Both routers use interface tunnel0 for the OPSF connection. 

==== Router setup playbook
This job template, "Network-Router-Setup," automates the initial configuration of network routers.

In addition to establishing OSPF routing, this playbook now configures the target device (e.g., cisco-rtr1) to send all syslog messages to Splunk over TCP port 5514 for centralized logging and monitoring.

Access AAP and run the job-template

image::router_setup.png[Router Setup, 150%]

=== Verify Syslogs
Step 1: After the Cisco router setup completes, return to splunk and click on the Cisco Networks App

image::cisco_networks.png[Cisco networks, 150%]

Step 2: Enter the routing dashboard

image::routing_dashboard1.png[Routing Dash, 150%]

Step 3: Verify that there is an entry of an OSPF event with a full adjacency 

image::routing_dashboard2.png[Routing Dash, 250%]

=== Configure an Alert
In splunk we can create an alert from a search. A Splunk search is when you manually run a query to find and analyze information in your data.

An alert is simply that search saved to run automatically if the search results meet a trigger condition you set (like "%OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 1, Nbr 192.168.2.2 on Tunnel0 from FULL to DOWN"), Splunk automatically performs an action, such as sending a webhook to EDA.

Step 1: Access the Splunk search field

image::search1.png[Search, 150%]

[quote]
**Note:** You will return to this browser tab after completing the next step

Step 2: Create an OPSF neighbor down event
Access cisco-rtr1 from the bastion console to shut down interface tunnel0

image::bastion.png[bastion, 150%]

* SSH password=`ansible123!`
* SSH into cisco-rtr1 and add the following commands

[source, BASH]
----
ssh admin@cisco-rtr1
config t
int tu 0
shut
----

Step 3: Return to the Splunk search

paste in the following line and search: 

[source, BASH]
----
 %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 1, Nbr 192.168.2.2 on Tunnel0 from FULL to DOWN
----

image::search2.png[Search, 150%]
image::search-3.png[Search, 150%]


Step 4: Save as an Alert (ospf-neighbor)

image::save_as_alert.png[Save As, 150%]

Complete the pop-up screen for save as an alert

=== Alert Settings
[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Title
| ospf-neighbor

| Permissions
| Shared in App

| Alert type
| Real-time

| Add Actions
| Add to Triggered Alerts
| Add Actions
| Webhook
    | URL
    | `{eda_webhook_url}`
|===

image::save_as_alert2.png[Save As, 100%]

=== Event Driven Ansible Addon (Reference Only)
For this lab environment we are using a simple webhook. However, for a more secure webhook, Splunk offers the Ansible EDA addon to integrate with EDA event streams. EDA event streams allow for token based authentication as well as storing a history of events. 

[quote]
**Note:** Do not actually configure, this section is for reference only

Step 1: Access the Ansible addon

image::eda_addon.png[Add on, 100%]

Step 2: Create a webhook to EDA event-stream configuration:

image::example_eventstream.png[example, 150%]

Step 3: Return to Edit Alert

image::return_edit_alert.png[return, 100%]

=== Router State (Returning to the Lab)
Here we need to return the router's OPSF neighbor to a steady state.

Step 1: Return the OPSF neighbor to a full adjacency

Access cisco-rtr1 from the bastion console to no shut interface tunnel0

image::bastion.png[bastion, 150%]

* SSH password=`ansible123!`
* SSH into cisco-rtr1 and add the following commands

[source, BASH]
----
ssh admin@cisco-rtr1
config t
int tu 0
no shut
----

== Summary

The Cisco router and Splunk are configured to observe and create alerts for OSPF neighbor down states. 

== Complete

You have completed this module. Move forward to the next section to configure the Ansible EDA controller.

Commit message:

Fix showroom documentation based on co-worker feedback
Module-01 fixes:
- Changed 'Scroll down' to 'Navigate to Templates page' for clarity
- Improved explanation of two-text-box workflow prompt with detailed breakdown
- Added better context about human-in-the-loop validation

Module-02 fixes:
- Added code formatting for OSPF trigger condition example
- Reorganized Alert Settings table with clearer structure
- Added note about using eda_webhook_url variable instead of screenshot URL
- Added detailed instructions for Step 2 webhook configuration
- Added navigation instructions for Step 3 Edit Alert

Module-03 fixes:
- Added instructions on how to review ospf.yml rulebook in EDA UI
- Added reference to GitHub repository for complete source code

Module-04 fixes:
- Improved Scenario-1 formatting and structure
- Added GitHub repository reference for all playbooks/rulebooks
- Added note about AI-generated playbook variation in Step 5
- Fixed formatting for Scenario-2 and Scenario-3 verification steps
- Added important note about OSPF dead timer in Scenario-3

content/modules/ROOT/pages/module-02.adoc, after:

= Section 3 - Splunk

== Part 2: AIOps with Network Automation

[quote]
Welcome to Part 2! In Part 1, you learned how Red Hat AI and Ansible Lightspeed work together to create self-healing infrastructure for Apache services. Now you'll apply those same AIOps concepts to **network infrastructure**, using Splunk for observability, Event-Driven Ansible for automation triggers, and Ansible Lightspeed to generate network remediation playbooks automatically.

In this lab environment, we've included Splunk to integrate with Event Driven Ansible (EDA). Splunk collects and indexes log files and other data from network sources in real-time. This indexed data is then stored in a way that allows for incredibly fast and flexible searching and analysis. From a Splunk search for OSPF related events, we can create a Splunk alert to send webhooks to EDA. 

Think of Splunk as an observability tool. 

[quote]
Observability tools, such as Splunk, Prometheus, Grafana, Dynatrace, and others, provide deep insights into the health and performance of IT systems. They excel at collecting metrics, logs, and traces to identify when something is wrong. However, they traditionally rely on human intervention to interpret the alerts and take corrective action. This is where Ansible EDA steps in, creating a powerful synergy.

== Splunk Setup and Router Configuration

=== Red Hat + Splunk
The integration between Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform and Splunk creates a powerful, two-way bridge that transforms IT operations by connecting Splunk's deep data analysis and observability with Ansible's robust automation capabilities. This is achieved through an add-on that allows for a seamless flow of information. 

image::redhat_splunk.png[Red Hat + Splunk, 100%]

=== Accessing Splunk
[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Component
| Value

| Splunk URL
| link:{splunk_url}[Splunk,window=_blank]

| Username
| `{splunk_username}`

| Password
| `{splunk_password}`
|===

	1.	Open Splunk using the above details ( use incognito window if needed )
	2.	Login using the credentials provided

=== Data Inputs
In Splunk, "data inputs" are the various methods and sources from which the platform can ingest data for indexing, searching, and analysis. They are the pathways that feed raw machine data into the Splunk system.
  	
Once logged into Splunk, click on the settings at the top of the screen and data inputs

image::data_inputs.png[Data Inputs, 250%]

==== TCP Port 5514
Splunk has been pre-loaded to open TCP port 5514. We simply need to add a data input to receive Cisco IOS syslogs using this port.

Step 1:  Add a new TCP input


image::tcp_1.png[Add TCP, 200%]

Step 2: Click on "New Local TCP"

image::tcp2.png[Add TCP, 200%]

Step 3: Select TCP, port 5514, and click "next" 

image::tcp_3.png[Add TCP, 200%]

Step 4: Configure the following input settings

=== Input Settings
[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Component
| Value

| Source Type
| cisco:ios

| App Context
| Cisco Networks (cisco:ios)

| Host 
| IP
|===

image::tcp_4.png[Add TCP, 100%]

Step 5: Validate your configuration and submit

image::tcp_5.png[Add TCP, 150%]

=== Cisco Routers 

This lab includes two Cisco Cat8000v routers. Both routers use interface tunnel0 for the OPSF connection. 

==== Router setup playbook
This job template, "Network-Router-Setup," automates the initial configuration of network routers.

In addition to establishing OSPF routing, this playbook now configures the target device (e.g., cisco-rtr1) to send all syslog messages to Splunk over TCP port 5514 for centralized logging and monitoring.

Access AAP and run the job-template

image::router_setup.png[Router Setup, 150%]

=== Verify Syslogs
Step 1: After the Cisco router setup completes, return to splunk and click on the Cisco Networks App

image::cisco_networks.png[Cisco networks, 150%]

Step 2: Enter the routing dashboard

image::routing_dashboard1.png[Routing Dash, 150%]

Step 3: Verify that there is an entry of an OSPF event with a full adjacency 

image::routing_dashboard2.png[Routing Dash, 250%]

=== Configure an Alert
In splunk we can create an alert from a search. A Splunk search is when you manually run a query to find and analyze information in your data.

An alert is simply that search saved to run automatically. When the search results meet a trigger condition you set (like `%OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 1, Nbr 192.168.2.2 on Tunnel0 from FULL to DOWN`), Splunk automatically performs an action, such as sending a webhook to EDA.

Step 1: Access the Splunk search field

image::search1.png[Search, 150%]

[quote]
**Note:** You will return to this browser tab after completing the next step

Step 2: Create an OPSF neighbor down event
Access cisco-rtr1 from the bastion console to shut down interface tunnel0

image::bastion.png[bastion, 150%]

* SSH password=`ansible123!`
* SSH into cisco-rtr1 and add the following commands

[source, BASH]
----
ssh admin@cisco-rtr1
config t
int tu 0
shut
----

Step 3: Return to the Splunk search

paste in the following line and search: 

[source, BASH]
----
 %OSPF-5-ADJCHG: Process 1, Nbr 192.168.2.2 on Tunnel0 from FULL to DOWN
----

image::search2.png[Search, 150%]
image::search-3.png[Search, 150%]


Step 4: Save as an Alert (ospf-neighbor)

image::save_as_alert.png[Save As, 150%]

Complete the pop-up screen for save as an alert

=== Alert Settings
Configure the alert with the following settings:

[cols="2,2", options="header"]
|===
| Setting
| Value

| Title
| ospf-neighbor

| Permissions
| Shared in App

| Alert type
| Real-time

| Add Actions (first)
| Add to Triggered Alerts

| Add Actions (second)
| Webhook

| Webhook URL
| `{eda_webhook_url}`
|===

[quote]
💡 **Important**: When configuring the Webhook action, use the `{eda_webhook_url}` variable shown above. The screenshot may show `controller.example.com` but you should use the EDA webhook URL specific to your lab environment.

image::save_as_alert2.png[Save As, 100%]

=== Event Driven Ansible Addon (Reference Only)
For this lab environment we are using a simple webhook. However, for a more secure webhook, Splunk offers the Ansible EDA addon to integrate with EDA event streams. EDA event streams allow for token based authentication as well as storing a history of events. 

[quote]
**Note:** Do not actually configure, this section is for reference only

Step 1: Access the Ansible addon

From the Splunk Apps menu, navigate to the Event-Driven Ansible app.

image::eda_addon.png[Add on, 100%]

Step 2: Create a webhook to EDA event-stream configuration

Click on **Configuration** and then **Event Streams**. Create a new event stream with the following details:

* **Name**: ospf-eda-stream
* **EDA Controller URL**: Your EDA controller URL
* **Token**: Authentication token from EDA
* **Verify SSL**: Depends on your environment (typically disabled for lab environments)

image::example_eventstream.png[example, 150%]

Step 3: Return to Edit Alert

Navigate back to your alert configuration by going to **Settings** > **Searches, reports, and alerts**, then click on your `ospf-neighbor` alert to edit it.

image::return_edit_alert.png[return, 100%]

=== Router State (Returning to the Lab)
Here we need to return the router's OPSF neighbor to a steady state.

Step 1: Return the OPSF neighbor to a full adjacency

Access cisco-rtr1 from the bastion console to no shut interface tunnel0

image::bastion.png[bastion, 150%]

* SSH password=`ansible123!`
* SSH into cisco-rtr1 and add the following commands

[source, BASH]
----
ssh admin@cisco-rtr1
config t
int tu 0
no shut
----

== Summary

The Cisco router and Splunk are configured to observe and create alerts for OSPF neighbor down states. 

== Complete

You have completed this module. Move forward to the next section to configure the Ansible EDA controller.
